---
title: "Seasons 19: What's new"
date: 2019-06-01 10:00:00 +0100
author: rahkiin
header:
  image: /assets/img/blog/hard-choices/snow.jpg
excerpt_separator: <!-- more -->
---

# What's new in Seasons 19?

The new version of Seasons, made for Farming Simulator 19, brings plenty if new and improved features.

Learn about the upgraded growth and weather, the updated visuals and audio, and the brand new animals in this post.

The manual will be updated to explain all that is new in Seasons 19. This update will arrive before release.
<!-- The manual is updated and explains all that is new in Seasons 19. Find it at ....... -->

We hope the changes and new features provide more interesting and less repetitive gameplay, matching more what farmers go through.

<!-- more -->

## Growth

The growth system in Seasons 19 has received a revamp. No longer is every year the same and is success it near-deterministic. Look out for bad weather destroying your crops, whether it be frost or draughts. Also plan a year ahead to keep your fields nutricious using crop rotation.

### Improved weeds

Farming Simulator 19 added weeds, weeding and spraying. Seasons changes the default behavior of weeds by growing them slowly in patches instead of whole fields.

Weeds grow in patches only when the temperature is right. They sprout all over the place as small weeds but grow when it gets warm. When it gets too cold they will start to die on their own. We have implemented preemptive spraying. If you spray early on you will not get weeds on the field until you harvest. Mechanical weeders can only remove young weeds and have no preemptive function.

### Weather-influenced growth

PCF



<<<<<<<REPETITION
There are 3 new growth states: planted, germinated and germination failed. Soil temperature impacts germination and if you plant when the soil temperatures are favourable, then the crops will go to the germinated state. It is possible for crops planted too late to germinate, but they will never mature. Check the Seasons calendar and make sure to plant crops at the correct times. Germination now happens on a daily basis instead of only at period change. Normal growth still only occurs during a period change






### Crop Rotation

Crop rotation
Influence on yield year over year
Doing very well, yield > 1
Doing excellent, also get some extra fertilization
In Field HUD

#### Rotation planner

The crop rotation planner is a new tool specially made for players to plan their rotations ahead. It can hold four rotations and they are saved, even in multiplayer.

<<TODO IMAGE OF PLANNER>>

### More world information

<<<<<<<REPETITION
In Farming Simulator 17, a failed germination was shown as 'harvested'. This has been changed to its own state: 'germination failed'. This is visible in the map screen. Before germination happens, a crop is 'planted', instead of in the first growth stage. After germination it starts growing. This is also reflected on the map screen.

The planted and failed germination states are also added to the Field Info HUD.

<<TODO IMAGE OF MAP SCREEN?>>


## Weather

The new sky and the freeing of the skybox system asked for a new weather system with more details.
TODO

### Detailed forecast and uncertainty

The weather forecast is now much more detailed. Not only does it feature minimum temperature, average temperature and maximumtemperature, but also wind speed and expected precipitation in millimeters or probability. On top of that, the next 24 hours are detailed in 3-hour blocks for even more information.

However, the forecast now is more uncertain in the future: the further away the prediction the more uncertain it is. A predicted rain in 5 days might not actually happen.

The weather-people don't know everything!

### Snow and the mask

Some small changes to the Seasons mask: we now fall back on the tip collision. This has become possible with new engine changes. This makes it possible to have high snow even on unprepared maps. However, it very likely looks bad, though, until the map has been fully prepared.

Bale rotting still requires a fully prepared map, so that every spot that is expected to cover for rotting also performs that function.

Placeables from the basegame have received their own masking area so they fit better. Map makers likely need to do this as well to further improve their maps for snow.


## Animals


DIE AT MIDNIGHT IN TRAILER
Produce either slurry if no straw, or manure if straw
Food and water depends on their weight

Hen lay eggs. To get chicks, get a rooster. Ideally is 1 rooster per 8 hen. If less rooster, less chance of breeding. If brooding, no egs.

### Breeds

TODO

### Horses

The horses have received a special treatment. We have redesigned them into a different type of gameplay: a livery stable. The gameplay tries to emulate a farm that provides housing and basic care of a horse for its owner.

A horse can be brought to the farm in exchange of no money. It has to be fed, cleaned and ridden every day. Depending on how much care it gets, an income is provided every day. Some breeds require more riding to earn the same amount of money as other breeds. Horses also provide more money when they are very fit.

This all comes at a high risk: an unhealthy animal can die. This will cost quite a bit of money for repayment to the owner.

### Grazing

The grazing mod from Farming Simulator 17 has been integrated directly into Seasons 19. Animals in pens that have grass will consume the grass as replacement for the grass in the trough. Be careful, as the grass in a pen can be completely eaten already. This depends on the size of the pen, on the amount of animals, and the time of year.

The changes of the animal pens into placeables that plant their own grass, together with more engine changes, allowed for automatic detection of the grass. No map changes are required. The only requirement is that the animal pen has grass.

### Water pump

The animals require a lot of attention. Daily feeding, daily watering, maybe even daily riding. The water requirements of the animals have been corrected to be more to realistic standards. To make it easier for players to have water in the troughs, a new water pump can be placed near the animal pen: it will automatically keep the water level of the water troughs at a minimum of 15%. The water cost is subtracted from your account.

## Better grass handling

The many engine and script changes in Farming Simulator 19 allowed for many new features. Two of those are a multi-step grass drying process, and improved rotting.

A new multi-step drying process has been added to create hay. When cutting wet grass, it needs to be tedded. Afterwards it needs to dry in the sun to become hay. When cutting dry (low moisture) grass, it does not need tedding but still needs to dry.
This means that making hay now depends on the weather. Good planning is required. The more detailed forecast will certainly help here.

If hay is left in the rain it will turn wet again, and afterwards it will start to rot. Freshly mown grass will rot after left outside for more than a day as well.

Hay and straw rots when kept outside in the rain. Even straw and hay heaps inside buildings will not rot anymore, like was the case in Seasons 17. Grass still always rots, as this material is wet. With the new drying system described above, it will take two days instead of one for the rotting to start on grass heaps.

## Improved visuals and audio

<!-- trees -->

Seasons 19 has received a new system for tree visuals: custom shaders. Together with GIANTS, the team has created new shaders and special custom textures. The trees now gradually change their looks, instead of the sudden color switch in Farming Simulator 17. The leafs grow in spring until fully grown in summer, after which they will brown for autumn.
The color of the tree depends on the time of year, the tree and on the weather.

<!-- Lighting -->

The lighting of Seasons has been rewritten to fully fit the new lighting system of Farming Simulator 19. It removes the moon in favor of darker nights and improves the dawn and dusk lighting. Of course the amount of daylight depends on the time of the year and the location of the GEO.

<!-- Sky -->

The new weather system fully integrates with the new cloud system. A varying amount of clouds are shown throughout the day and move with the wind direction. With these changes, the weather during the night is finally working well.

On top of the cloud system, Seasons adds a new weather event: storms. Storms produce thunder and an occasional lightning effect will light up your fields.

### Immersive ambient sound system

Seasons replaces the wind and rain sounds of the basegame with a new system. This new system ties in tightly with the visuals: it is now possible to hear how fast the wind is blowing or how heavy it rains or hails.
A large set of sounds is being mixed in real time to create the desired effects both inside a vehicle and outside a vehicle.

A new set of flags is added to the map sound system to allow for quiet birds in the winter.

## Adjusted vehicle maintenance and repair

We have switched the Seasons17 repair system for the basegame 19 repair, but added new algorithms for sell price and repair prices. Also, we have separated the scratches (visible wear) from the vehicle repair. To improve the performance of your vehicle you can repair. To make the vehicle nice and shiny again you will need to repaint the vehicle. This is costly, depending on the size and complexity of the machine.



