---
title: "Seasons 19: What's new"
date: 2019-01-01 10:00:00 +0100
author: rahkiin
header:
  image: /assets/img/blog/hard-choices/snow.jpg
---

What's new in Seasons 19?





















Growth
New growth states:
Planted
Germination failed
Germinated

PCF - patchy crop failure

Weeds grow in patches - preemptive spraying is possible with a sprayer
Crop rotation
Influence on yield year over year
Doing very well, yield > 1
Doing excellent, also get some extra fertilization

There are 3 new growth states: planted, germinated and germination failed. Soil temperature impacts germination and if you plant when the soil temperatures are favourable, then the crops will go to the germinated state. It is possible for crops planted too late to germinate, but they will never mature. Check the Seasons calendar and make sure to plant crops at the correct times. Germination now happens on a daily basis instead of only at period change. Normal growth still only occurs during a period change

Weeds now grow in patches only when the temperature is right. When it gets too cold they will start to die on their own. We have implemented preemptive spraying. If you spray early on you will not get weeds on the field until you harvest. Mechanical weeders can only remove young weeds and have no premptive function

Grazing
Grass inside animal pens automatically moves to the feeding throughs

Grass
Hay and straw heaps no longer rot inside due to engine changes
Rotting is based on weather.
Multi-step drying possible due to engine changes’

Visuals
Shader based tree coloring
New lighting setup for the new sky and atmosphere

Weather
New weather system with cloud and sky integration.

Maintenance and repair
We have switched the Seasons17 repair system for the basegame 19 repair, but added new algorithms for sell price and repair prices. Also, we have separated the scratches (visible wear) from the vehicle repair. To improve the performance of your vehicle you can repair. To make the vehicle nice and shiny again you will need to repaint the vehicle.






I never told you the biggest changes in it yet, I'll quickly sum things up:
- New weather system. Weather forecast now has uncertainty too (the further away the forecast the more uncertain)
- New growth system with weeds, a proper germination stage. You can see "planted" "germinated" and "germination failed"
- Growth now fails in patches instead of all at once. So if your field starts dying you can maybe save a part still
- Crop rotation
- Fixing scratches on your vehicles requires repainting which is separate from repairing. (Got to fix an issue here though)
- Drying grass takes longer: if you cut grass when crops are wet, you will have wet grass that needs tedding and drying in the sun. If you have dry crops you will get semidry grass that needs drying in the sun only before it is hay. Weather affects what happens with it. If it rains a lot it will become wet again. It will rot after 1 day.
- We have added the grazing mod directly into Seasons so if an animal pen has grass, this is fed to the animals
- Shader trees :D
